# Introduction
Retrieved-context theory (Howard & Kahana, 2002) describes the state of the art in terms of the rules that govern the chances that an experience we have now will come to mind later. It is supported by vast behavioural and neural data. According to this theory, the likelihood of recalling a particular experience is determined by the similarity between the encoding and retrieval contexts, abstract constructs implemented in brain states. Initially, the Temporal Context Model only considered similarity between temporally contiguous brain states. More recently (Polyn et al., 2009; Sederberg et al., 2008), retrieved-context theory recognised that semantic and experiential similarity also influence which experience would come to mind. Semantic similarity refers to the tightness of pre-experimental associations between stimuli. Experiential similarity (Polyn et al., 2009) refers to shared encoding processes during the session itself. For example, when some stimuli are processed auditorily and others visually, the experiential similarity is greater within, compared to across, presentation modality.

A recent variant of retrieved-context theory, emotional Context-Maintenance and Retrieval (eCMR; Talmi et al., 2019), focuses on the emotional dimension of experiential similarity. People process emotional experiences differently than neutral ones in terms of appraisal (Sander et al., 2005), attention (Pourtois et al., 2013), physiology (Stephens et al., 2010), and feelings. "Emotional similarity" (Riberto et al., 2019), therefore, is a type of experiential similarity, which refers to similarity between encoding operations of emotional stimuli. eCMR follows CMR in the way it simulates experiential similarity. A stimulus category, such as presentation modality or emotionality, which is thought to trigger unique processing, is modelled as an additional item feature, called a "source" item feature, with values that differentiate stimuli of each type. Thus, in eCMR emotional stimuli are modelled with a value of 1 in the source feature, and neutral stimuli with a value of 0. This feature is used not only to describe which items are similar to each other, but also to model the cognitive repercussion of their unique features. It is known that emotional items enjoy preferential processing during encoding. These are simulated in eCMR by tighter associations between the item and context layers in the model, specifically between the source item feature and the source context feature. The degree of extra processing is governed by the value of parameter Phi_emot. When it equals 1, emotional and neutral items are modelled as processed equally. When it is greater than 1, emotional items are modelled as receiving extra processing during encoding. In order to use eCMR to predict what an individual or a group would recall, it could be very useful to set the value of Phi_emot through empirical measurement (Turner et al., 2016). An excellent candidate is the late positive potential ERP component (LPP), which increases in amplitude when participants process emotionally arousing visual stimuli (Schupp et al., 2006). In this project, our aim was to examine the suitability of the LPP for neuro-cognitive modelling of memory recall.

Changes in LPP amplitudes due to affective significance have been observed at the group level across a range of stimuli and presentation durations. However, to be useful to model an individual participant, it is also important to establish how sensitive and specific the LPP is at the level of the individual. Recently, Schupp and colleagues (Schupp & Kirmse, 2021) have examined this question by using a case-by-case approach in three studies, using a range of emotional induction techniques. They observed that the LPP was sensitive to emotional arousal in 98% of the cases observed. Analysis of comparisons which did not differ in emotional arousal allowed them to further determine that the effect is also specific to arousal. These results support the use of the LPP to constrain the Phi_emot parameter.

However, it is not known whether a similar prevalence would be obtained under the presentation conditions more common in memory experiments. Participants in Schupp and colleagues' study encoded briefly presented pictures passively. By contrast, participants in typical memory recall experiments are aware of an upcoming memory test. Intentional encoding instructions could dilute the LPP if they bias attention away from intra-stimulus processing towards inter-stimulus relationships, if participants employ encoding strategies that minimise LPP differences, or engage in covert spaced rehearsal of emotional and neutral stimuli. The potential impact of encoding mode is evident in findings that incidental encoding instructions alter temporal contiguity effects (Healey, 2018). Our first aim, therefore, was to replicate Schupp and colleagues' findings using a setup more typical in memory research. In addition to the specific benefit of testing the sensitivity and specificity of the emotional modulation of the LPP during intentional encoding, a replication would also serve to increase confidence in the findings if the same are obtained in another large sample (Schupp and colleagues had a total N of 50), tested in a different laboratory, with a different set of stimuli, and where the stimuli are presented for a longer duration (xx s instead of 150 ms in Schupp and colleagues' experiments).

Our second aim was to examine the relationship between the emotional modulation of the LPP and the emotional modulation of memory. Attention and memory are typically coupled, such that when all else is held equal, increased attention during encoding increases participants' ability to recall attended stimuli subsequently. Increased attention to emotional stimuli during encoding is considered a key driver of enhanced memory for these stimuli. Accordingly, previous studies report that emotional arousal increases both LPP and memory. Yet despite the average effect of emotion on both LPP and memory, it is not known whether the relationship between them is consistent either within-subject (across study-test cycles) or between-subjects. One possibility is that individuals with increased emotion-dependent LPP differences will exhibit larger emotion-dependent memory differences. Another, not mutually exclusive possibility is that individuals would recall best those lists where encoding was accompanied by increased LPP. The dissociation between within- and between-subject effects in ERPs was recently demonstrated for the left parietal old-new effect, where robust within-subject effects were observed despite null between-subject effects (MacLeod & Donaldson, 2017).

Simulations with eCMR show that all else held equal, increasing the value of Phi_emot results in increased recall of emotional stimuli (Figure 1). If LPP differences provide a good index for the value of this parameter, then the model predicts a positive association between the amplitude of the difference wave and the difference between the number of pictures recalled, either within-subject, between-subjects, or both.

# Method
This secondary data analysis is based on data from Zarubin et al. (2020). A more detailed description of the methods in the original experiment is provided in the paper.

## Participants
The forty included participants from the mixed condition in Zarubin et al. (2020) were re-analysed. One participant was excluded for missing data from three lists and one participant was excluded due to having fewer than 16 trials in one of the subsequent memory conditions. The final sample consisted of 38 participants (28 females, M_age = 20, SD_age = 1.07). Gender and age data were missing for one of the participants. All participants provided written informed consent and the experiment was approved by the Wofford College Institutional Review Board (insert citation to Zarubin et al. 2020).

## Materials
There were 22 pictures in each list and nine lists in the whole experiment. The first two pictures were used as fillers to control for primacy effects and were excluded from data analysis. The pictures were selected from the International Affective Picture System (insert ref), the Geneva Affective Picture Database (insert ref), the Emotional Picture Set (insert ref), the image pool of Talmi et al. (2007), and Google Images. The pictures were either of negative valence or neutral valence. The neutral condition was divided into semantically unrelated and semantically related neutral pictures in the original study, but they were collapsed in this secondary data analysis to increase the number of trials in the neutral condition.

## Procedure
The participants studied 22 pictures shown consecutively on the screen for 2000 ms with a 4000 ms inter-trial interval, intended to reduce emotional carryover effects (Talmi & McGarry 2012). The presentation order of both the lists and the images within lists was randomised. A one-minute arithmetic distractor task followed immediately after the study task to reduce rehearsal of the pictures and recency effects. A verbal recall test followed the distractor task. The participants were instructed to recall images only from the list that they had just seen. The participants had three minutes to recall the images from the study phase, but could end earlier if they finished.

## EEG Pre-processing
Raw EEG files were downloaded from the open science framework page for the Zarubin et al. (2020) study. The EEG was pre-processed with the EEGLAB toolbox in MATLAB (insert ref to EEGLAB). The data were re-referenced offline to the average of the left and right mastoid electrodes and filtered between 0.1 and 40 Hz with a band-pass FIR filter. The data were time-locked to the stimulus and segmented into epochs between -2000 and 3000 ms post-stimulus onset. The epochs were baseline corrected using a pre-stimulus time window between -200 and 0 ms. Customized threshold functions from the FASTER toolbox (insert reference to FASTER) were used to detect and reject bad channels and bad epochs based on participant-level z-transformed values over trials and electrodes that exceeded +/-3. Independent component analysis was used to correct for EOG artefacts, by manually removing components classified as blinks, horizontal, or vertical eye-movements. Bad channels which were deleted prior to ICA were interpolated after the ICA cleaning. In addition, bad channels within single epochs were detected and interpolated with a criterion of +/-3 SD.

All subjects contributed at least 16 trials in each of the four ERP conditions. The mean number of trials was 30.7 (SD = 6.08) in the negative remembered condition, 26.1 (SD = 5.54) in the negative forgotten condition, 48 (SD = 15.33) in the neutral remembered condition, and 66.5 (SD = 16.93) in the neutral forgotten condition after pre-processing. Trials that were rejected during EEG pre-processing were excluded from the behavioural analyses as well to ensure that the EEG and behavioural data contained the same trials and to increase the chance of finding a relation between the two measures.

## Behavioural Data Analysis
We investigated whether there was an emotion-enhanced memory effect by comparing the proportion recalled for negative items and the proportion recalled for neutral items with a paired t-test. We also ran a repeated-measures ANOVA.

## EEG Data Analysis

### Focal ERP Analysis (LMM and GLMM)
We first analysed the electrodes and time windows where the LPP typically is maximal in the literature. Averaged EEG amplitude was extracted from four centro-parietal electrodes (Cz, CP1, CP2, and Pz) in an early time window between 400-1000 ms and a late time window between 1000-2000 ms post-stimulus onset. We extracted the EEG amplitudes separately for subsequently remembered and subsequently forgotten trials for both the negative and the neutral condition. All mixed effects model analyses were conducted using the lme4 package in R (Bates et al. 2015).

We first performed a linear mixed-effects model to analyse whether ERP amplitude was predicted by emotion and subsequent memory. In this model we used ERP amplitude as the dependent variable and fixed effects of Emotion (Negative vs Neutral) and Subsequent Memory (Remembered vs Forgotten), plus random intercept and random slope effects of participant. The model formula was:

```
ERP amplitude ~ 1 + Emotion * Memory + (1 + Emotion * Memory | Participant)
```

The random effect structure needed to be simplified to only include a random intercept effect of participant in the late LPP time window due to a warning of singular fit. The statistical significance of the fixed effects and their interaction was assessed using a chi^2 Wald test as implemented in the car package (Fox & Weisberg, 2019). Significant interactions were followed up using pairwise contrasts as implemented in the emmeans package in R (Lenth, 2024), applying a Benjamini & Hochberg (false discovery rate, FDR) correction for multiple comparisons.

With the purpose of extracting individual slopes for each participant to feed into eCMR, we next performed a binomial generalized linear mixed-effects model where we investigated whether subsequent memory was predicted by emotion and LPP amplitude. In this model we used subsequent memory as the dependent variable and included Emotion (Negative vs Neutral) and LPP amplitude as fixed effects and random intercept and random slope effects of participant. The model formula was:

```
Memory ~ 1 + Emotion * LPP + (1 + Emotion * LPP | Participant)
```

### Focal ERP Analysis (ANOVA)
The two time windows were analysed separately with 2 (Emotion, Negative vs Neutral) x 2 (Subsequent Memory, Remembered vs Forgotten) repeated-measures ANOVAs.

### Global ERP Analysis
We complemented the focal analysis with a global data-driven analysis including all data points between 0 and 2000 ms, the time window when the stimulus was presented. The reason for including this analysis is that analysing ERP data from a small group of electrode sites and time windows may overlook effects at other electrode sites and time windows. In this analysis we controlled for multiple comparisons using cluster-based permutation tests as implemented in the FieldTrip toolbox (insert FieldTrip reference). The first step of this analysis was to perform t-tests at every ERP data sample. Significant samples, uncorrected at alpha = .05, that were neighbours in time or space, including at least two electrodes, were grouped into clusters. The cluster-level t-value was computed by calculating the sum of the t-values from all samples included in the cluster. Finally, we compared the cluster-level t-value in the observed data to the size of the maximal cluster in 5000 permutations, for which the data points were randomly swapped between conditions within participants. The cluster-level Monte Carlo p-value was calculated as the proportion of the permutations for which the maximum cluster was larger than the clusters in the observed data. The exact spatiotemporal distribution of the clusters should be interpreted with caution given that the correction for multiple comparisons is applied at the cluster level rather than at the individual sample level (see Sassenhagen & Draschkow, 2018).

### Bootstrap Analysis
To be useful for the purpose of model constraint, the LPP needs to be reliable within subjects. We therefore performed a bootstrap analysis to assess the reliability of the negative-neutral difference within each participant's data. The rationale of this analysis is that negative stimuli should elicit a more positive LPP than neutral stimuli independent of which specific trials contributed to calculating the ERPs. The number of trials was first equated for the two conditions by randomly selecting the same number of trials as in the condition with fewer trials from the condition with more trials. The data included in this analysis were extracted from the same centro-parietal electrode sites as in the focal ERP analysis, i.e., Cz, CP1, CP2, and Pz. Bootstrap resampling from single trials was used to create a distribution of 1000 resampled ERPs per condition. A sliding time window was applied to detect the most positive LPP peak (the mean amplitude of the 100 ms time window between 400-1000 ms for the early LPP and between 1000-2000 ms for the late LPP). Difference scores were calculated by subtracting the amplitude in the neutral condition from the amplitude in the negative condition for each bootstrap sample. Next, the proportion of positive bootstrap differences was calculated for the two time windows based on the rationale that participants with robust LPP effects should have a large proportion of positive bootstrapped differences. We interpreted the emotion-enhanced LPP as being reliable if a proportion of 0.9 or more of the bootstrapped differences were positive based on the fact that this cutoff has been used in similar analyses in the concealed information test literature (for example Rosenfeld et al., 2017).

### Correlation Between Emotion-Enhanced LPP and Emotion-Enhanced Memory
The ERPs were z-transformed using the mean and the standard deviation of a pre-stimulus interval between -200 and 0 ms. This was done on a single-trial level and separately for all electrodes. Next, the z-transformed LPP was extracted from the same centro-parietal electrodes as in the focal ERP analysis for both the early (400-1000 ms) and the late (1000-2000 ms) time window.

In the between-subjects correlation, we calculated the average LPP and memory performance across the 9 lists and computed a negative-neutral difference score in both measures. These measures were then correlated using Bayesian Pearson correlation.

Besides this between-subjects correlation we also calculated a within-subject correlation. In this analysis, we correlated the emotion-enhanced LPP and the emotion-enhanced memory effect within lists and calculated the average correlation coefficient across lists for each participant with Pearson correlation. Next, we performed a Bayesian one-sample t-test against zero to test if there was a correlation.

# Results

## Behavioural Results: Replication
Replicating the original analysis, a paired t-test showed that memory performance was significantly higher for negative items (M = 0.54, SD = 0.10) compared to neutral items (M = 0.42, SD = 0.14), t(37) = 6.18, p < .001. For the record, a one-way repeated-measures ANOVA with proportion remembered as the dependent variable and condition (Negative vs Category vs Neutral) as the independent variable showed a significant effect, F(1,65) = 42.85, p < .001, partial eta squared = 0.54. Follow-up pairwise comparisons show that negative items were remembered more than both category items (t(37) = 2.46, p = .01) and neutral items (t(37) = 9.41, p < .001). Memory performance was also higher for category items (semantically related neutral items) than for neutral items (semantically unrelated neutral items; t(37) = 7.29, p < .001). The pattern of results was hence Negative > Category > Neutral.

## EEG Results

### Focal ERP Analysis: Extended Replication
A linear mixed-effects model was conducted separately for the early and the late LPP time windows to investigate whether ERP amplitude was predicted by Emotion (Negative vs Neutral) and Subsequent Memory (Remembered vs Forgotten).

In the early time window, there was a main effect of Emotion (beta = .10, chi^2(1) = 6.84, p = .009) and a main effect of Subsequent Memory (beta = .25, chi^2(1) = 26.70, p < .001) and a significant Emotion x Subsequent Memory interaction (beta = .20, chi^2(1) = 14.70, p < .001). Follow-up pairwise contrasts showed that the LPP amplitude was higher for subsequently remembered than for subsequently forgotten negative items (z ratio = -5.61, p < .001), while there was no difference in LPP amplitude for subsequently remembered and forgotten neutral items (z ratio = -0.88, p = .379).

In the late time window, there was a main effect of Emotion (beta = .14, chi^2(1) = 12.72, p < .001), indicating that the LPP amplitude was higher for negative than for neutral items. There was no significant main effect of Subsequent Memory (beta = .08, chi^2(1) = 2.13, p = .144). There was a trend for an Emotion x Subsequent Memory interaction (beta = .09, chi^2(1) = 3.06, p = .080).

Next we conducted binomial generalized mixed-effects models to test if Emotion and LPP amplitude predicted memory separately for the two time windows. In the early time window, there was a main effect of Emotion (beta = .21, chi^2(1) = 22.68, p < .001), a main effect of LPP (beta = .08, chi^2(1) = 18.87, p < .001) and an Emotion x LPP interaction (beta = .06, chi^2(1) = 11.20, p < .001). The interaction was followed up by running the same analysis separately for negative and neutral items. For negative items, there was a significant positive relationship between early LPP amplitude and memory (beta = .14, chi^2(1) = 25.43, p < .001). In contrast, there was no significant relationship between early LPP amplitude and memory for neutral items (beta = .01, chi^2(1) = 0.48, p = .488).

In the late time window, there was a main effect of Emotion (beta = .23, chi^2(1) = 66.58, p < .001), showing once again that memory was higher for negative than neutral items, but importantly there was neither a main effect of LPP amplitude (beta = .02, chi^2(1) = 1.98, p = .160) nor any interaction between Emotion and LPP amplitude (beta = .02, chi^2(1) = 2.44, p = .118).

### Old ANOVA Write-up
A 2 (Emotion, Negative vs Neutral) x 2 (Subsequent Memory, Remembered vs Forgotten) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted separately for the early and the late LPP time window.

In the early time window, there was a significant main effect of Emotion (F(1,37) = 44.342, p < .001, eta_p^2 = .55), a significant main effect of Subsequent Memory (F(1,37) = 26.036, p < .001, eta_p^2 = .41) and a significant Emotion x Subsequent Memory interaction (F = 14.285, p < .001, eta_p^2 = .28). Follow-up paired t-tests showed that there was a significant subsequent memory effect for negative items (t(37) = 5.56, p < .001, d = .64), but not for neutral items (t(37) = 0.59, p = .556, d = .06). Importantly, negative items had more positive amplitude than the neutral items both for remembered items (t(37) = 7.07, p < .001, d = .96) and for forgotten items (t(37) = 3.00, p = .005, d = .39), indicating that there was an emotion-enhanced LPP effect.

In the late time window, there was a main effect of Emotion (F(1,37) = 33.497, p < .001, eta_p^2 = .48) and a borderline significant Emotion x Subsequent Memory interaction (F(1,37) = 5.926, p = .058, eta_p^2 = .09). The main effect of emotion was due to that negative items had more positive amplitude than neutral items, indicating that there was a significant emotion-enhanced LPP effect in the late time window, as well. The main effect of emotion and the subsequent memory effect for negative items replicate the findings in the Zarubin paper while the absence of a subsequent memory effect for neutral items is a partial replication.

### Early LPP (400-1000 ms)
*Figure placeholder.*

### Late LPP (1000-2000 ms)
*Figure placeholder.*

### Global ERP Analysis: Extended Replication
We first analysed the main effect of Emotion (Negative vs Neutral trials) and found a positive cluster (p < .001) which was significant between approximately 380-2000 ms with a widespread distribution. In other words, there was an emotionally enhanced LPP effect which roughly overlapped with the early and late time windows analysed in the focal analysis. Replicating the focal analysis, there was also a main effect of subsequent memory with more positive ERPs for remembered compared to forgotten trials (p < .001) with a widespread spatial distribution between around 210-1240 ms. In addition, there was an Emotion x Subsequent Memory interaction between 360-1240 ms (p < .001) with a widespread distribution, indicating that the negative items subsequent memory effect was larger than the neutral items subsequent memory effect. In addition, there was a borderline significant widespread cluster (p = .029) between 1240-1390 ms. Follow-up cluster permutation tests showed that for negative items, remembered items were related to more positive-going ERPs between 220-1420 ms (p < .001). This effect was also widespread. In contrast, there was no significant subsequent memory ERP effect for neutral items (all ps > .19). Overall, the global analysis replicated the focal analysis and shows that these results hold up in more conservative tests with correction for multiple comparisons. The analysis also shows that the time windows and electrodes analysed in the focal analysis capture the maximum of the LPP effects well in this data set.

### Bootstrap ERP Analysis
We next performed a bootstrap analysis to test if the emotion-enhanced LPP effect was reliable within subjects. This analysis showed that 73.7% of the participants had a reliable emotion-enhanced LPP effect in the early time window and 50% had an effect in the later time window.

### Correlation Between Emotion-Enhanced LPP and Emotion-Enhanced Memory
To be useful for the purpose of model constraint the LPP will need to correlate with memory performance. We first investigated if the emotionally enhanced LPP amplitude (negative minus neutral items) correlated with emotionally enhanced memory (negative minus neutral items) between subjects. Surprisingly, the Bayesian Pearson correlation showed moderate evidence for no correlation for both the early time window (r = -.018, BF01 = 4.925) and the late time window (r = -.028, BF01 = 4.885).

Next, we investigated the correlation between emotion-enhanced LPP amplitude and emotion-enhanced memory within subjects. For each subject, we correlated the emotion-enhanced LPP with the emotion-enhanced memory across the 9 lists. We then calculated the average correlation coefficient for each subject and tested it against zero using a one-sample Bayesian t-test. There was moderate support for no correlation in both the early time window (t(37) = -.26, p = .795, BF01 = 7.658) and the late time window (t(37) = -1.26, p = .215, BF01 = 3.698).

### Early LPP: Between-subject correlation
*Figure placeholder.*

### Late LPP: Between-subject correlation
*Figure placeholder.*

### Within-subject correlation
*Figure placeholder.*
